Migration to native delayed delivery (#4862)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/tools/migrate-to-native-delivery.md

---
title: Migrating to native delivery
summary: An overview of the tool supporting migrating from timeout manager to native delivery
reviewed: 2020-05-29
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The timeout migration tool is designed to help systems administrators to migrate existing timeouts from the legacy [TimeoutManager](/nservicebus/messaging/timeout-manager.md) storage to the [native delayed delivery](/nservicebus/messaging/delayed-delivery.md) infrastructure of the currently used transport.

NOTE: Make sure to check that the transport in use supports native delayed delivery before performing any migration attempt.
```

Hybrid mode was made available for endpoints, which means that the timeouts that were already registered in the system, would still be consumed by the legacy [TimeoutManager] (/nservicebus/messaging/timeout-manager.md) and the new delayed deliveries  would flow through the native implementation.

Most of the timeouts that were registered through the legacy timeout manager might have been consumed by now. There might be scenarios in which there are timeouts waiting to expire, and those are stored in the timeout storage.
For those use cases, there is a .NET Core global tool that enables migration of those timeouts to the native delayed delivery infrastructure.

The tool supports live-migration so there's no need to shut down the endpoints before running the tool. The tool will hide the timeouts it will migrate from the legacy TimeoutManager to eliminate duplicate deliveries in the system.
The tool provides a preview command in order to gather an overview of the endpoints and timeouts to migrate in the system.

## Supported persistence mechanisms

The current version of the tool supports the following persistence mechanisms:

> - [SQL](/persistence/sql/) using SQL Server under the hood

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SQL Persistence](/persistence/sql/) using the SQL Server implementation
```

> - [RavenDB](/persistence/ravendb) versions 3 and 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [RavenDB](/persistence/ravendb) versions 3.5.x and 4.x of the RavenDB database server
```

## Supported transports

> The current version of the tool supports the following transports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool supports the following transports:
```

- [RabbitMQ](/transports/rabbitmq/)

## How to install

```

> dotnet tool install migrate-timeouts -g --source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dotnet tool install migrate-timeouts -g
```

if it's going to be on Nuget publicly available the `--source` argument is not needed.

```

To verify if the tool was installed correctly, run:

```
dotnet tool list -g
```

> It should be listed there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the tool is listed among the available installed tools.
```

## Using the tool

The migration tool expects a few parameters in order to successfully migrate the timeouts.

These parameters are required independent of the persistence used:

> ```--target```:         The connection string of the target transport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--target`: The connection string of the target transport
```

> ```--cutofftime```:     The time from which to start migrating timeouts, it makes sense to start migrating timeouts that will expire at least one day in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--cutofftime`: The time from which to start migrating timeouts, it makes sense to start migrating timeouts that will expire at least one day in the future.
```

> ```--endpoint```:       The endpoint to migrate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--endpoint`: The endpoint to migrate.
```

> ```--allendpoints```:   Indicates to migrate all endpoints in one run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--allendpoints`: Indicates to migrate all endpoints in one run
```

> Even though parameters --endpoint and --allendpoints are option, one of them is required by the tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--endpoint` and `--allendpoints` arguments are mutually exclusive, either one is required.
```

> Depending on the persistence, there are a few additonal parameters needed in order to run the migration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the persistence, there are a few additional parameters required in order to run the migration:
```

For RavenDB:

> ```--serverUrl```:      The server url for the persistence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--serverUrl`: The RavenDB server URL
```

> ```--databaseName```:   The name of the database in which timeouts are stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--databaseName`: The database name where timeouts to migrate are stored
```

> ```--prefix```:         The prefix used for storage of timeouts, the default is "TimeoutDatas"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--prefix`: The prefix used for storage of timeouts. The default value is "TimeoutDatas"
```

> ```--ravenVersion```:   The supported versions for RavenDB are 3.5 and 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--ravenVersion`: The allowed values are "3.5" and "4"
```

For SQL:

> ```--source```:         The connection string to the database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--source`: The connection string to the database
```

> ```--tablename```:      The name of the table in which timeouts are stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--tablename`: The name of the table in which timeouts are stored
```

> ```--dialect```:        The sql dialect used to access the database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--dialect`: The SQL dialect used to access the database
```

Which are the supported values?

#### Preview the migration

The tool can be run in preview mode in order to get an overview of the endpoints available, and the timeouts within those endpoint to migrate.
It's highly suggested to run in preview mode first and verify that the results match the expected timeouts to migrate.

RavenDB example:

```

> dotnet migrate-timeouts preview ravendb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate-timeouts preview ravendb
```

                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        -c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>
                        --serverUrl <serverUrl>
                        --databaseName <databaseName>
                        [--prefix] <prefix>
                        [--ravenVersion] <ravenVersion>
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [--allendpoints]
```

SQL example:

```

> dotnet migrate-timeouts preview sqlp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate-timeouts preview sqlp
```

                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        -c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>
                        --source <source>
                        --tablename <tablename>
                        --dialect <sqlDialect>
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [--allendpoints]
```

#### Running a migration

Migrating from RavenDB persistence

```

> dotnet migrate-timeouts ravendb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate-timeouts ravendb
```

                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        -c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>
                        --serverUrl <serverUrl>
                        --databaseName <databaseName>
                        [--prefix] <prefix>
                        [--ravenVersion] <ravenVersion>
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [--allendpoints]
                        [-a|--abort]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```

Migrating from Sql persistence

```

> dotnet migrate-timeouts preview sqlp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate-timeouts preview sqlp
```

                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        -c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>
                        --source <source>
                        --tablename <tablename>
                        --dialect <sqlDialect>
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [--allendpoints]
                        [-a|--abort]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```

Aborting a migration

```

> dotnet migrate-timeouts <repeat previous parameters>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate-timeouts <repeat previous parameters>
```

                        [-a|--abort]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```

## How the tool works

Before actually migrating any timeouts, it's highly recommended to use the preview option.
This option will perform the following actions:
 - check that the tool can connect to the storage
 - check that the tool can connect to the target transport

>  - verify that the necessary topology is in place in the target transport to support native delayed delivery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - verify that the necessary topology is in place and the target transport supports native delayed delivery
```

 - list all the endpoints for which the tool can detect timeouts
 - calculate the amount of timeouts to migrate per endpoint
 - validate if there are timeouts the tool is [unable to migrate](migrate-to-native-delivery.md#limitations)

> Once this information has been reviewed, the migration process can be initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once this information has been reviewed, the migration process can be started.
```

> Even though the tool supports migrating all endpoints connected to the persistence at once, it is highly suggested to migrate endpoint by endpoint, especially for critical endpoints. Even when selecting the -allendpoints options, the tool will conduct an endpoint-by-endpoint migration behind the scenes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the tool supports migrating all endpoints connected to the persistence at once, it is highly suggested to migrate endpoint by endpoint, especially for critical endpoints. Even when selecting the `--allendpoints` option, the tool will execute an endpoint-by-endpoint migration behind the scenes.
```

## Limitations

> As documented in the [RabbitMQ transport](/transports/rabbitmq/delayed-delivery.md), the maximum delay value of a timeout is 8,5 years. If the migration tool encounters any timeouts that have delivery times set beyond that, it won't be possible to migrate that endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As documented in the [RabbitMQ transport](/transports/rabbitmq/delayed-delivery.md), the maximum delay value of a timeout is 8,5 years. If the migration tool encounters any timeouts that have delivery time set beyond that, it won't be possible to migrate that endpoint.
```

> If the tool presents endpoints that are not part of the system when running the --analyze option, it might be that an endpoint was renamed at some point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the tool presents endpoints that are not part of the system when running the `--analyze` option, it might be that an endpoint was renamed at some point.
```

Is it `analyze` or `preview`?

> Any timeouts that were stored for that endpoint, might already be late in delivery and should be handled seperate from the migration tool since the tool has no way to detect where to migrate them to.

Reviewer: ☝️ this doesn't make sense to me

Author: Well let's say that the customer has EndpointA, they renamed the endpoint to "Shipping", but never checked that there were still timeouts waiting to be sent out by the timeout manager. Those timeouts have OwningTimeoutManager set to EndpointA, not to Shipping. In that case we will find timeouts for EndpointA, but EndpointA is not part of the system anymore. It's not the responsibility of the tool to fix these, and the customer might not even realise that these are a problem. Does that make more sense?

## What if something goes wrong

> If the migration is stopped or fails for some reason, the tool is able to recover and continue where it left off last time, considering that the tool is run with the same parameters. In order to run the tool with different parameters after initialising the migration process, the running migration process needs to be aborted using the --abort option. Any timeouts that have been fully migrated at that point will not be rollbacked, they will have already be delivered to the target transport and may even have been already delivered to the destination endpoint. Timeouts that were scheduled to migrate will be rollbacked and reappear to the legacy TimeoutManager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the migration is stopped or fails, the migration tool can recover and continue where it left off. To resume an interrupted migration the tool must be run with the same arguments.

To run the tool with different arguments any in-progress or pending migration needs to be aborted using the `--abort` option. Any timeouts that have been fully migrated at that point will not be rollbacked, they will have already been delivered to the target transport and may even have been already delivered to the destination endpoint. Timeouts that were scheduled to migrate will be rollbacked and made available again to the legacy TimeoutManager.
```

NOTE: `--endpoint` and `--allEndpoints` arguments are mutually exclusive, either one is required.

**RavenDB**

```
migrate-timeouts ravendb migrate
                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        --serverUrl <serverUrl>
                        --databaseName <databaseName>
                        [--prefix] <prefix>
                        [--ravenVersion] <ravenVersion>
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [-c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>]
                        [--allendpoints]
```

**Sql Persistence**

```
migrate-timeouts sqlp migrate
                        -t|--target <targetConnectionString>
                        --source <source>
                        --dialect <sqlDialect>
                        [-c|--cutofftime <cutofftime>]
                        [--endpoint] <endpointName>
                        [--allendpoints]
```

NOTE: The listed endpoints will be the in the escaped form that is used to prefix the endpoints timeout table

### Aborting a migration

> To abort an ongoing migration use the `abort` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To abort an ongoing migration use the `abort` command. This will revert any pending timeouts that still need to be migrated.

NOTE: Any timeouts that have already been migrated will not be reverted.
```

                        [--ravenVersion] <ravenVersion>
```

**Sql Persistence**

```
migrate-timeouts sqlp abort
                        --source <source>
                        --dialect <sqlDialect>
```

## How the tool works

The migration tool will perform a few health checks:

- verify it's able to connect to the storage
- verify it's able to connect to the target transport
- verify that the target transport supports native delayed delivery
- check that necessary infrastructure for native delays is setup for all delayed message destinations found
- list all the endpoints for which the tool can detect timeouts
- calculate the amount of timeouts to migrate per endpoint
- validate if there are timeouts the tool is [unable to migrate](migrate-to-native-delivery.md#limitations)

Once this information has been reviewed, the migration process can be started.
Even though the tool supports migrating all endpoints connected to the persistence at once, it is highly suggested to migrate endpoint by endpoint, especially for critical endpoints. Even when selecting the `--allEndpoints` option, the tool will execute an endpoint-by-endpoint migration behind the scenes.

## Cleanup

> The tool will not delete any timeouts or tables to prevent message loss. This section describes how to cleanup archived timeouts and remove no longer used tables once the migration have been verified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to prevent accidental message loss, the tool will not delete any timeouts or tables. This section describes how to cleanup archived timeouts and remove no longer used tables once the migration have been verified.
```

> WARN: This is a destructive operation and should only be performed once its been verified that the migration has been successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WARN: This is a destructive operation and should only be performed once it has been verified that the migration has been successful.
```

### RavenDB

Delete all the documents in the `TimeoutDatas` collection that have an `OwningTimeoutManager` starting with `__migrated__`.

### Sql persistence

Use `SELECT * FROM TimeoutsMigration_State` to list all performed migrations. For all the successful once do the following:

- Make sure that [RabbitMQ compatibility mode](/transports/rabbitmq/delayed-delivery.md#backwards-compatibility) is turned off
- Delete the `{EndpointName}_TimeoutData` table
- Delete the migration table named `TimeoutData_migration_{MigrationRunId}`, where `MigrationRunId` is taken from the output of the `TimeoutsMigration_State` query.

## Limitations

> As documented in the [RabbitMQ transport](/transports/rabbitmq/delayed-delivery.md), the maximum delay value of a timeout is 8,5 years. If the migration tool encounters any timeouts that have delivery time set beyond that, it won't be possible to migrate that endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As documented in the [RabbitMQ transport](/transports/rabbitmq/delayed-delivery.md), the maximum delay value of a timeout is 8 and a half years. If the migration tool encounters any timeouts that have delivery time set beyond that, it will not migrate that endpoint's timeouts.
```

If the tool presents endpoints that are not part of the system when running the `preview` command, it might be that an endpoint was renamed at some point.
Any timeouts that were stored for that endpoint, might already be late in delivery and should be handled separate from the migration tool since the tool has no way to detect where to migrate them to.

## Troubleshooting

If the migration started but stopped or failed along the way, the migration tool can recover and continue where it left off. To resume an interrupted migration the tool must be run with the same arguments.

> To run the tool with different arguments any in-progress migration needs to be aborted using the `abort` command. Any timeouts that have been fully migrated at that point will not be restored since they already have been delivered to the native timeout infrastructure. Timeouts that were scheduled to migrate will be made available again to the legacy Timeout Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the tool with different arguments, any in-progress migrations first need to be aborted using the `abort` command. Any timeouts that have been fully migrated at that point will not be restored since they have already been migrated to the native timeout infrastructure. Timeouts that were scheduled to migrate will be made available again to the legacy Timeout Manager.
```

### Logging

Turn on verbose logging using the `--verbose` option.

### RavenDB

Use the Raven Studio to check the state of ongoing and previous migrations by filtering documents using the prefix `TimeoutMigrationTool`. Completed migrations will be named `TimeoutMigrationTool/MigrationRun-{endpoint}-{completed-time}` while any ongoing migration will be present as `TimeoutMigrationTool/State`. The contents of the documents contains metadata about the migration such as the time started, time completed, used cutoff time etc.

### Sql Persistence

> The history and migrated data is always kept in the database so nothing can get lost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The history and migrated data is always kept in the database.
```

---
title: Migrating to native delivery
summary: An overview of the tool supporting migrating from timeout manager to native delivery
reviewed: 2020-05-29
---

In v7 [native delayed delivery](/nservicebus/messaging/delayed-delivery.md) was introduced across most transports that are supported today.
Hybrid mode was made available for endpoints, which means that the timeouts that were already registered in the system, would still be consumed by the legacy [TimeoutManager] (/nservicebus/messaging/timeout-manager.md) and the new delayed deliveries  would flow through the native implementation.

> In v8, support for the hybrid mode is removed. Most of the timeouts that were still registered through the legacy timeout manager might have been consumed by now, but there might be scenario's in the system in which there are remain timeouts waiting to expire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the timeouts that were registered through the legacy timeout manager might have been consumed by now. There might be scenarios in which there are timeouts waiting to expire, and those are stored in the timeout storage.
```

> For those use cases, there is a .net tool available that will enable migration of those timeouts to the native delayed delivery infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those use cases, there is a .NET Core global tool that enables migration of those timeouts to the native delayed delivery infrastructure.
```

- [RabbitMQ](/transports/rabbitmq/)

## Before using the tool

> Even that considerations were made to not delete any information when doing the migration it is recomended to follow industry standards related to modyfing the database. It is advisable to make a backup of production database and first perfrom the migration on the test enviornment.  

Author: ```suggestion
Even that considerations were made to not delete any information when doing the migration it is recommended to follow industry standards related to modifying the database. It is advisable to make a backup of production database and first perform the migration on the test environment.  
```

- `--endpoint`(Optional): The endpoint to migrate.
- `--allEndpoints`(Optional): Indicates to migrate all endpoints in one run
- `--cutoffTime`(Optional): The time from which to start migrating timeouts, it makes sense to start migrating timeouts that will expire at least one day in the future. The format in which to specify the `cutoffTime` is `yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss`. The migration tool will convert the specified `cutoffTime` to UTC time.

> - `forceUseIndex`(Optional): Required when migrating large amounts or timeouts. Requires all endpoints using the database to be turned off to not modify the timeout data.

Reviewer 2: How does someone know if they have large amounts? Is 1000 large? 100000?

Reviewer 3: The `preview` command will tell them to use this option should they need it
